---
output-file: index.html
---

# XR - Virtual Reality / Augmented Reality

Extended reality (XR), which encompasses virtual reality (VR), augmented reality
(AR), and mixed reality (MR), is a collection of rapidly growing technologies
with an increasing number of applications being researched and deployed in the
field of geography.

- [Ecosystem Education with Augmented Reality: A Flexible Tool for In-Field Learning](https://doi.org/10.1080/00330124.2022.2134151)

- [Geography and Virtual Reality](https://doi.org/10.1111/gec3.12590)

- _[Virtual Reality Methods](https://go.exlibris.link/xsjXLkBR)_

- [Using Virtual Reality (VR) for Teaching and Learning in Geography: Fieldwork, Analytical Skills, and Employability](https://doi.org/10.1080/03098265.2021.1901867)

- [UBC Emerging Media Lab Resources](https://eml.ubc.ca/resources/)

## Content

### Geography-related

- [UBC Geography Tours - AR](https://explore.echoes.xyz/profiles/hw7VpyzPikTPGXOJ)

- [UBC Geography - Stanley Park Virtual Tour](https://eml.ubc.ca/projects/geography-vr/)

- [Camosun Bog 360](https://mikejerowsky.com/camosun-bog-360/)

- [Biogeography Teaching and Research Lab - Virtual Field Trips](https://blogs.ubc.ca/alpineplants/virtual-field-trips/)

- [The Stanford Ocean Acidification Experience](https://store.steampowered.com/app/409020/The_Stanford_Ocean_Acidification_Experience/)

- [Google Earth VR](https://store.steampowered.com/app/348250/Google_Earth_VR/)

- [Google Arts & Culture - Exhibitions](https://artsandculture.google.com/project/expeditions#about)

- [Usability of WebXR Visualizations in Urban Planning - VR Examples](https://moonshroom.github.io/Spatial_WebXR/VR_index.html)

### Others

- [WebXR Samples](https://immersive-web.github.io/webxr-samples/)

- [A-Frame Examples](https://aframe.io/aframe/examples/)

- [Babylon.js Community Examples](https://www.babylonjs.com/community/)

- [PlayCanvas Games Demos](https://playcanvas.com/explore)

- [Steam VR Games](https://store.steampowered.com/vr/)

## Development Tools and Frameworks

XR development has and continues to be a complex and specialized field often
requiring in-depth knowledge of game development, 3D modelling, and programming
languages like C# or JavaScript. When developing content for XR, identify the
goals of your project and consult
[UBC's Emerging Media Lab](https://eml.ubc.ca/) to get assistance with setting a
clear scope and connecting with partners.

360 images and video are often a good place to get started with VR content as
they can be easier to create and accessible to wider audiences while still
providing an immersive experience.

For AR, review platforms, like [Echoes](https://echoes.xyz/), which provide
interfaces and support for developing and distributing virtual tours.

### WebXR

WebXR is a new set of standards that enable VR and AR content to be rendered via
web browsers. In some browsers, like Firefox and Safari, WebXR is still flagged
as experimental, but it can be enabled through adjustments in settings.

- _[AR and VR Using the WebXR API: Learn to Create Immersive Content with WebGL, Three.js, and A-Frame](https://go.exlibris.link/xkKTvLbB)_

Different frameworks have been in development over the past few years to help
simplify developing VR content with WebXR and its now obsolete predecessor,
WebVR.

- [A-Frame](https://aframe.io/) - A popular, HTML and JavaScript-based framework
  for developing web-based VR content.

- [Babylon.js](https://www.babylonjs.com/) A JavaScript-based framework for
  developing web-based VR Content

  - _[Going the Distance with Babylon.js](https://go.exlibris.link/FPW2334K)_

### Unity

Unity provides provides a powerful editor game engine for developing AR and VR
applications. Multiple software development kits have been developed to extend
its functionality and cohesively work with GIS software.

- _[A Guide to Capturing and Preparing Photogrammetry for Unity](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1-hlQora-awgVfJmYvbsqz1VY7opF9tYTTObRFYIeStA/preview)_

- _[Unity Development Cookbook](https://go.exlibris.link/Z0s14jy0)_

- _[Unity Virtual Reality Development with VRTK4](https://go.exlibris.link/RZ4dSxDl)_

#### Relevant Plugins and SDK

- [ArcGIS Maps SDK for Unity](https://developers.arcgis.com/unity/)

- [MapBox Maps SDK for Unity](https://docs.mapbox.com/unity/maps/guides/)

- [Cesium for Unity Quickstart](https://cesium.com/learn/unity/unity-quickstart/)

### Godot

While lacking the maturity, ease-of-use, and breadth of GIS integrations
compared to Unity, the Godot game engine is an increasingly popular choice for
AR and VR development in both commercial and academic settings due to it being a
powerful, free and open-source option.
[LandscapeLab](https://landscapelab.boku.ac.at) provides an excellent example of
how the engine can be applied within a geography-centered setting.

- [Godot Engine Documentation](https://docs.godotengine.org/en/stable/)

- _[Godot 4 Game Development Projects](https://go.exlibris.link/rQkxd2Bl)_

- _[Godot 4 Game Development Cookbook](https://go.exlibris.link/Zh53LNQs)_

- _[Game Development with Blender and Godot](https://go.exlibris.link/mpqzSL4G)_

#### Relevant Plugins and SDK

- [Geodot-Plugin README](https://github.com/boku-ilen/geodot-plugin)

- [HTerrain Plugin Documentation](https://hterrain-plugin.readthedocs.io/en/latest/)

### Other Tools

- [DEM.Net Elevation API](https://elevationapi.com/) - Quickly generate 3D
  Models from Open Street Map data

- [Qgis2threejs Plugin](https://qgis2threejs.readthedocs.io/en/docs/Exporter.html) -
  Export DEM data in QGIS to 3D models
